[Polkadot Wiki Migration] Set up a Full Node (#33)
polkadot-developers/polkadot-docs: infrastructure/general/setup-full.md

---
title: Set up a Full Node
description: Instructions on how to set up a full node in accordance to your platform and the differences between different node types.
---

If you're building dApps or products on a Substrate-based chain like Polkadot, Kusama, or a custom
Substrate implementation, you want the ability to run a node-as-a-back-end. After all, relying on
your infrastructure is always better than a third-party-hosted one in this brave new decentralized
world.

> This guide will show you how to connect to [Polkadot](https://polkadot.network/), but the
> same process applies to any other [Substrate](https://substrate.io)-based chain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide will show you how to connect to [Polkadot](https://polkadot.network/){target=\_blank}, but the
same process applies to any other [Polkadot SDK](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/polkadot_sdk_docs/polkadot_sdk/index.html){target=\_blank}-based chain.
```

<!-- TODO - maybe we keep this as a "intro" page for the infrastructure section, and make this page more focused post-merge? -->

> ### Types of Nodes

Reviewer 2: I think it would be nice to have sub-headers like:
#### Full Node
#### Light Node
and so on..

Reviewer: > I think it would be nice to have sub-headers like:
> 
> #### Full Node
> #### Light Node
> and so on..

This would be better, as now it seems like a massive amount of text

A full node could eventually rebuild every block's state without additional information and become
an archive node. This still needs to be implemented at the time of writing. If you need to query
historical blocks' states past what you pruned, you must purge your database and resynchronize your node,
starting in archive mode. Alternatively, you can use a backup or snapshot of a trusted source to
avoid needing to sync from genesis with the network and only need the states of blocks past that
snapshot.

Full nodes allow you to read the current state of the chain and to submit and validate extrinsics
directly on the network without relying on a centralized infrastructure provider.

Another type of node is a *light node*. A light node has only the runtime and the current state
but doesn't store past blocks and so cannot read historical data without requesting it from a node
that has it. Light nodes are useful for resource-restricted devices. An interesting use-case of
light nodes is a browser extension, which is a node in its own right, running the runtime in WebAssembly
format, as well as a full or light node that is completely encapsulated in WebAssembly and can be

> integrated into web apps: [Smoldot](https://github.com/smol-dot/smoldot.){target=_blank}

Reviewer 2: This link is broken

    [Substrate Connect](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate-connect){target=_blank} provides a way to interact with
    substrate-based blockchains in the browser without using an RPC server. It is a light node that runs
    entirely in JavaScript. Substrate Connect uses a
    [Smoldot Wasm light client](https://github.com/paritytech/smoldot){target=_blank} to securely connect to the
    blockchain network without relying on specific third parties. Substrate Connect is available on Chrome
    and Firefox as a [browser extension](https://substrate.io/developers/substrate-connect/){target=_blank}.

<!--separates content from instructions-->

---

<!--setup instructions differ per os, presented in tabs-->

## Setup Instructions

This isn't recommended if you're a validator. Please see the [secure validator setup](maintain-guides-secure-validator.md) if you are running validator.

!!!note 
    The bash commands that are provided to run against **your node** use `Polkadot` as the
    default chain

    Use the `--chain` flag if you follow the setup instructions to setup a `Kusama` node. For example:

    ```bash
    polkadot --name "Your Node's Name" --chain kusama
    ```

> === "macOS"

Reviewer 2: If we plan to migrate https://docs.substrate.io/install/ this section will be duplicated

We can reference that section, but for now, it think it makes sense having it here

Author: now that we have an install page merged - we can just link that here?

>     - Install Homebrew within the terminal by running:

Reviewer: There are some formatting issues with this list items. Also, you could use a numeric list instead of `-`

    ```bash
    git clone https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk polkadot-sdk
    cd polkadot-sdk
    ./scripts/init.sh
    cargo build --release
    ```
    - Start your node:

    ```bash
    polkadot --name "Your Node's Name"
    ```

    - Find your node on [Telemetry](https://telemetry.polkadot.io/#list/Polkadot)

=== "Windows"
    - Install [WSL](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install-win10).
    - Install [Ubuntu](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install-win10) (same webpage).
    - Determine the latest version of the
    [Polkadot binary](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/tree/master/polkadot/releases).
    - Download the correct Polkadot binary within Ubuntu by running the following command. Replace
    `*VERSION*` with the tag of the latest version from the last step (for example, `v0.8.22`):
    ```bash
    curl -sL https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/releases/download/*VERSION*/polkadot -o polkadot
    ```

    - Then, run the following:
    ```bash
    sudo chmod +x polkadot
    ```
    - Start your node:
    ```bash
    ./polkadot --name "Your Node's Name"
    ```

>     - Find your node on [Telemetry](https://telemetry.polkadot.io/#list/Polkadot){target=_blank}

Reviewer 2: I'd add that you need to wait until your node is sync and then you will find it there

=== "Linux (Standalone)"

    !!!info
        The nature of pre-built binaries means that they may not work on your particular architecture or
        Linux distribution. If you see an error like `cannot execute binary file: Exec format error` it
        likely means the binary is not compatible with your system. You will either need to compile the
        [**source code**](#clone-and-build) or use [**Docker**](#using-docker).

    - Determine the latest version of the
    [Polkadot binary](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/releases).

    - Download the correct Polkadot binary within Ubuntu by running the following command. Replace
    `*VERSION*` with the tag of the latest version from the last step (e.g. `v0.8.22`):

    ```bash
    curl -sL https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/releases/download/*VERSION*/polkadot -o polkadot
    ```

    - Run the following: `sudo chmod +x polkadot`

>     - Run the following:

Reviewer 2: This may be nitpicking, but I'd try to avoid this titles since are not super descriptive of the command that the user will run, maybe:

"Provide execution rights to the polkadot binary:"
```
sudo chmod +x polkadot
```

    dnf config-manager --set-enabled polkadot
    # Install polkadot (You may have to confirm the import of the GPG key, which
    # should have the following fingerprint: 9D4B2B6EB8F97156D19669A9FF0812D491B96798)
    dnf install polkadot
    ```

    !!!note
        If you choose to use a custom folder for the polkadot home by passing `--base-path '/custom-path'`,
        you will need to issue following command:

        ```bash
        sudo mkdir /etc/systemd/system/polkadot.service.d
        ```

        And create a new file inside this folder:

        ```bash
        sudo -e /etc/systemd/system/polkadot.service.d/custom.conf
        ```

        With the following content:

        ```
        [Service]
        ReadWritePaths=/custom-path
        ```

        And finally issue a reload to have your modifications applied by systemd:

        ```bash
        systemctl daemon-reload
        ```

## Clone and Build

The [`paritytech/polkadot`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/tree/master/polkadot) repository
master branch contains the latest Polkadot code. To install it as a binary, `cargo` may be used to install directly from a specific release:

> <!-- TODO: better instructions for installing polka binary -->

Reviewer 2: I'm a bit confused with this section, it seems that the content it covers overlaps with the last section here. Could you please take a look at it?

```bash
git clone https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk polkadot-sdk
cd polkadot-sdk
./scripts/init.sh
cargo build --release
```

Alternatively, if you wish to use a specific release, you can check out a specific tag (`v0.8.3` in
the example below):

```bash
git clone https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk polkadot-sdk
cd polkadot-sdk
git checkout tags/polkadot-v1.9.0
./scripts/init.sh
cargo build --release
```

## Run

The built binary will be in the `target/release` folder, called `polkadot`.

**Polkadot**:

```bash
polkadot --name "Your Node's Name"
```

<!-- TODO: link wss tutorial -->

Use the `--help` flag to determine which flags you can use when running the node. For example, if connecting to your node remotely, you'll probably want to use `--rpc-external` and `--rpc-cors all`.

The syncing process will take a while, depending on your capacity, processing power, disk speed and
RAM. On a $10 DigitalOcean droplet, the process can complete in some ~36 hours.

Congratulations, you're now syncing with Polkadot. Keep in mind that the process is identical when
using any other Polkadot SDK-based chain.

> ## Running an Archive Node

Reviewer: This section seems out of place

Author: Added it as a subsection - not sure if we want to move it into its own page? @eshaben

Author: These also need to be checked, cause last I checked it's now two separate flags: `state-pruning` and `block-pruning`?

Reviewer 3: You could just put it in one section and use tabs:

```

The built binary will be in the `target/release` folder, called `polkadot`. As a starting point, you can use the following command to run either a full or archive node:

=== "Full"

    ```bash
    polkadot --name "Your Node's Name"
    ```

    !!! note
         The syncing process will take some time, depending on your capacity, processing power, disk speed, and RAM. On a $10 DigitalOcean droplet, it can take about 36 hours to complete.

=== "Archive"

    ```bash
    polkadot --name "My node's name" --pruning archive
    ```

    !!! note
        Using an additional flag, `--wasm-execution compiled`, you can almost quadruple synchronization speed. However, this uses much more CPU and RAM, so it should be turned off after the node syncs.

Use the `--help` flag to determine which flags you can use when running the node. For example, if you want to connect to your node remotely, you'll probably want to use `--rpc-external` and `--rpc-cors all`.

Congratulations, you're now syncing with Polkadot. Keep in mind that the process is identical when
using any other Polkadot SDK-based chain.
```

Only the state of the past 256 blocks will be kept when running as a simple sync node, as in the preceding section. It
defaults to [archive mode](#types-of-nodes) when validating. To support the full state, use the
`--pruning` flag:

```bash
polkadot --name "My node's name" --pruning archive
```

It is possible to almost quadruple synchronization speed by using an additional flag:
`--wasm-execution Compiled`. Note that this uses much more CPU and RAM, so it should be turned off
after the node syncs.

## Using Docker

Finally, you can use Docker to run your node in a container. Doing this is more advanced, so it's
best left up to those already familiar with Docker or who have completed the other set-up
instructions in this guide. Be aware that when you run Polkadot in Docker, the process only listens
on localhost by default. If you would like to connect to your node's services (RPC, and Prometheus)
you need to ensure that you run the node with the `--rpc-external`, and `--prometheus-external`
commands.

> ```zsh
> docker run -p 9944:9944 -p 9615:9615 parity/polkadot:v0.9.13 --name "calling_home_from_a_docker_container" --rpc-external --prometheus-external
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```bash
docker run \
-p 9944:9944 \
-p 9615:9615 parity/polkadot:v0.9.13 \
--name "calling_home_from_a_docker_container" \
--rpc-external \
--prometheus-external
```

---
title: Set up a Full Node
description: Instructions on how to set up a full node in accordance to your platform and the differences between different node types.
---

If you're building dApps or products on a Substrate-based chain like Polkadot, Kusama, or a custom
Substrate implementation, you want the ability to run a node-as-a-back-end. After all, relying on
your infrastructure is always better than a third-party-hosted one in this brave new decentralized
world.

This guide will show you how to connect to [Polkadot](https://polkadot.network/), but the

> same process applies to any other [Substrate](https://substrate.io)-based chain. First, let's

Reviewer 4: True outside of informal tutorials. Please rewrite without 'let's'

<!-- TODO: we should explain this concept of "sealing" -->

When a validator seals block 1, it takes the blockchain's state at block 0. It then applies all
pending changes on top of it and emits the events resulting from these changes. Later, the chain’s
state at block one is used the same way to build the chain’s state at block 2, and so on. Once
two-thirds of the validators agree on a specific block being valid, it is finalized.

An _archive node_ keeps all the past blocks and their states. An archive node makes it convenient
to query the past state of the chain at any point in time. Finding out what an account's balance at
a particular block was or which extrinsics resulted in a specific state change are fast operations
when using an archive node. However, an archive node takes up a lot of disk space - around Kusama's
12 millionth block, this was around 660 GB.

!!!tip

    On [Stakeworld](https://stakeworld.io/docs/dbsize){target=_blank} you can find a list of the database sizes of Polkadot and Kusama nodes.

Archive nodes are used by utilities that need past information - like block explorers, council

> scanners, discussion platforms like [Polkassembly](https://polkassembly.io){target=_blank}, and others. They need

Author: @dawnkelly09 should probably add this one if not already added

to be able to look at past on-chain data.

A *full node* prunes historical states: all finalized blocks' states older than a configurable
number except the genesis block's state. This is 256 blocks from the last finalized one by default.
A pruned node this way requires much less space than an archive node.

A full node could eventually rebuild every block's state without additional information and become
an archive node. This still needs to be implemented at the time of writing. If you need to query

> historical blocks' states past what you pruned, you must purge your database and resync your node,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
historical blocks' states past what you pruned, you must purge your database and resynchronize your node,
```

avoid needing to sync from genesis with the network and only need the states of blocks past that
snapshot.

Full nodes allow you to read the current state of the chain and to submit and validate extrinsics
directly on the network without relying on a centralized infrastructure provider.

Another type of node is a *light node*. A light node has only the runtime and the current state
but does not store past blocks and so cannot read historical data without requesting it from a node
that has it. Light nodes are useful for resource-restricted devices. An interesting use-case of
light nodes is a browser extension, which is a node in its own right, running the runtime in WebAssembly
format, as well as a full or light node that is completely encapsulated in WebAssembly and can be
integrated into web apps: [Smoldot](https://github.com/smol-dot/smoldot.){target=_blank}

!!!note Substrate Connect
    [Substrate Connect](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate-connect){target=_blank} provides a way to interact with
    substrate-based blockchains in the browser without using an RPC server. It is a light node that runs

>     entirely in Javascript. Substrate Connect uses a

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    entirely in JavaScript. Substrate Connect uses a
```

>     [smoldot Wasm light client](https://github.com/paritytech/smoldot){target=_blank} to securely connect to the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    [Smoldot Wasm light client](https://github.com/paritytech/smoldot){target=_blank} to securely connect to the
```

>     blockchain network without relying on specific 3rd parties. Substrate Connect is available on Chrome

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    blockchain network without relying on specific third parties. Substrate Connect is available on Chrome
```

    and Firefox as a [browser extension](https://substrate.io/developers/substrate-connect/){target=_blank}.

<!--separates content from instructions-->

---

<!--setup instructions differ per os, presented in tabs-->

## Setup Instructions

> This is not recommended if you're a validator. Please see the [secure validator setup](maintain-guides-secure-validator.md) if you are running validator.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This isn't recommended if you're a validator. Please see the [secure validator setup](maintain-guides-secure-validator.md) if you are running validator.
```

    ```bash
    # Install dnf-plugins-core (This might already be installed)
    dnf install dnf-plugins-core
    # Add the repository and enable it
    dnf config-manager --add-repo https://releases.parity.io/rpm/polkadot.repo
    dnf config-manager --set-enabled polkadot
    # Install polkadot (You may have to confirm the import of the GPG key, which
    # should have the following fingerprint: 9D4B2B6EB8F97156D19669A9FF0812D491B96798)
    dnf install polkadot
    ```

    !!!note
        If you choose to use a custom folder for the polkadot home by passing `--base-path '/custom-path'`,
        you will need to issue following command:

        ```bash
        sudo mkdir /etc/systemd/system/polkadot.service.d
        ```

        And create a new file inside this folder:

        ```bash
        sudo -e /etc/systemd/system/polkadot.service.d/custom.conf
        ```

        With the following content:

        ```
        [Service]
        ReadWritePaths=/custom-path
        ```

        And finally issue a reload to have your modifications applied by systemd:

        ```bash
        systemctl daemon-reload
        ```

## Clone and Build

> The [paritytech/polkadot](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/tree/master/polkadot) repo's

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The [`paritytech/polkadot`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/tree/master/polkadot) repository
```

> master branch contains the latest Polkadot code.  To install it as a binary, `cargo` may be used to install directly from a specific release:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
master branch contains the latest Polkadot code. To install it as a binary, `cargo` may be used to install directly from a specific release:
```

```bash
git clone https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk polkadot-sdk
cd polkadot-sdk
./scripts/init.sh
cargo build --release
```

Alternatively, if you wish to use a specific release, you can check out a specific tag (`v0.8.3` in
the example below):

```bash
git clone https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk polkadot-sdk
cd polkadot-sdk
git checkout tags/polkadot-v1.9.0
./scripts/init.sh
cargo build --release
```

## Run

The built binary will be in the `target/release` folder, called `polkadot`.

**Polkadot**:

```bash
polkadot --name "Your Node's Name"
```

<!-- TODO: link wss tutorial -->

Use the `--help` flag to determine which flags you can use when running the node. For example, if connecting to your node remotely, you'll probably want to use `--rpc-external` and `--rpc-cors all`.

The syncing process will take a while, depending on your capacity, processing power, disk speed and
RAM. On a $10 DigitalOcean droplet, the process can complete in some ~36 hours.

Congratulations, you're now syncing with Polkadot. Keep in mind that the process is identical when
using any other Polkadot SDK-based chain.

## Running an Archive Node

> When running as a simple sync node (above), only the state of the past 256 blocks will be kept. It

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Only the state of the past 256 blocks will be kept when running as a simple sync node, as in the preceding section. It
```

defaults to [archive mode](#types-of-nodes) when validating. To support the full state, use the
`--pruning` flag:

```bash
polkadot --name "My node's name" --pruning archive
```

It is possible to almost quadruple synchronization speed by using an additional flag:
`--wasm-execution Compiled`. Note that this uses much more CPU and RAM, so it should be turned off
after the node syncs.

## Using Docker

Finally, you can use Docker to run your node in a container. Doing this is more advanced, so it's
best left up to those already familiar with docker or who have completed the other set-up
instructions in this guide. Be aware that when you run polkadot in docker, the process only listens

> on localhost by default. If you would like to connect to your node's services (rpc, and prometheus)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
on localhost by default. If you would like to connect to your node's services (RPC, and Prometheus)
```
